<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIII: The Hall-Sun Saith Another Word</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">The Hall-Sun Saith Another Word</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>It was no later than the next night, and a many of what thralls were not with the host were about in the feast-hall with the elders and lads and weaklings of the House; for last night’s tidings had drawn them thither. Gisli had gone back to his kindred and the wain-burg in the Upper-mark, and the women were sitting, most of them, in the Women’s-Chamber, some of them doing what little summer work needed doing about the looms, but more resting from their work in field and acre.</p>
			<p>Then came the Hall-Sun forth from her room clad in glittering raiment, and summoned no one, but went straight to her place on the dais under her namesake the Lamp, and stood there a little without speaking. Her face was pale now, her lips a little open, her eyes set and staring as if they saw nothing of all that was round about her.</p>
			<p>Now went the word through the Hall and the Women’s-Chamber that the Hall-Sun would speak again, and that great tidings were toward; so all folk came flock-meal to the dais, both thralls and free; and scarce were all gathered there, ere the Hall-Sun began speaking, and said:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“The days of the world thrust onward, and men are born therein</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A many and a many, and divers deeds they win</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the fashioning of stories for the kindreds of the earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A garland interwoven of sorrow and of mirth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the world a warrior cometh; from the world he passeth away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And no man then may sunder his good from his evil day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the Gods hath he been tormented, and been smitten by the foe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He hath seen his maiden perish, he hath seen his speech-friend go:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His heart hath conceived a joyance and hath brought it unto birth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he hath not carried with him his sorrow or his mirth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He hath lived, and his life hath fashioned the outcome of the deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the blossom of the people, and the coming kindreds’ seed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thus-wise the world is fashioned, and the new sun of the morn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where earth last night was desert beholds a kindred born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That to-morrow and to-morrow blossoms all gloriously</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many a man and maiden for the kindreds yet to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fair the Goth-folk groweth. And yet the story saith</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the deeds that make the summer make too the winter’s death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That summer-tides unceasing from out the grave may grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the spring rise up unblemished from the bosom of the snow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thus as to every kindred the day comes once for all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When yesterday it was not, and to-day it builds the hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So every kindred bideth the night-tide of the day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereof it knoweth nothing, e’en when noon is past away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’en thus the House of the Wolfings ’twixt dusk and dark doth stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And narrow is the pathway with the deep on either hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the left are the days forgotten, on the right the days to come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And another folk and their story in the stead of the Wolfing home.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do the shadows darken about it, is the even here at last?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or is this but a storm of the noon-tide that the wind is driving past?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Unscathed as yet it standeth; it bears the stormy drift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor bows to the lightening flashing adown from the cloudy lift.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see the hail of battle and the onslaught of the strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they go adown to the folk-mote that shall bide there over long.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see the slain-heaps rising and the alien folk prevail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Goths give back before them on the ridge o’er the treeless vale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see the ancient fallen, and the young man smitten dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet I see the War-duke shake Throng-plough o’er his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stand unhelmed, unbyrnied before the alien host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the hurt men rise around him to win back battle lost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the wood yield up her warriors, and the whole host rushing on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the swaying lines of battle until the lost is won.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then forth goes the cry of triumph, as they ring the captives round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cheat the crow of her portion and heap the warriors’ mound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There are faces gone from our feast-hall not the least beloved nor worst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the wane of the House of the Wolfings not yet the world hath cursed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sun shall rise to-morrow on our cold and dewy roof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For they that longed for slaughter were slaughtered far aloof.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>She ceased for a little, but her countenance, which had not changed during her song, changed not at all now: so they all kept silence although they were rejoicing in this new tale of victory; for they deemed that she was not yet at the end of her speaking. And in good sooth she spake again presently, and said:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“I wot not what hath befallen nor where my soul may be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For confusion is within me and but dimly do I see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if the thing that I look on had happed a while ago.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They stand by the tofts of a war-garth, a captain of the foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a man that is of the Goth-folk, and as friend and friend they speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I hear no word they are saying, though for every word I seek.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now the mist flows round me and blind I come aback</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the House-roof of the Wolfings and the hearth that hath no lack.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Her voice grew weaker as she spake the last words, and she sank backward on to her chair: her clenched hands opened, the lids fell down over her bright eyes, her breast heaved no more as it had done, and presently she fell asleep.</p>
			<p>The folk were doubtful and somewhat heavy-hearted because of those last words of hers; but they would not ask her more, or rouse her from her sleep, lest they should grieve her; so they departed to their beds and slept for what was yet left of the night.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
